[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> Well, I have found being on
this earth the most incredible
adventure.
I've loved every minute of
it, and I often get curious
that there's so
much complaint going
on when we're given so much.
That sounds la-di-dah, and so
on, but it's really the truth.
So I write books
about it because I'm
trying to get certain
points across,
and I really didn't start
that until quite late--
book writing.
I had really a happy childhood,
and I was given free reign,
and I used to
spend a lot of time
up on a place called
Dorchester Hill.
And so I'm all by myself, and
I had a nice, nice childhood.
But when I was seven,
they sent me to school,
said I had to go to school.
And the first day in
school was a nightmare
because the teacher punished the
boy in front of me-- not me--
but I was the teacher's pet.
And a terrible thing
happened, I thought,
to the little boy
in front of me,
who pulled a little
girl's pigtails.
And the teacher did so
many awful things to him
and finally had gagged
him and struck him
in the knee hole
of her desk tied up
for the rest of the day.
And I went home, and I said, I
will never go back there again.
And my older brother said,
if you don't go to school,
they'll put you in jail.
And this great rage
filled me, and I came out
with this statement--
but I own myself.
They don't own me.
So I proceeded to be
a very bad student.
I skipped school constantly,
and I would actually
hide out in places where
they couldn't find me.
I've never quite forgotten
that and my protest
that I owned myself,
and I think that's been
one of the [INAUDIBLE].
And it's not a pretense
or anything else.
It's just the way it was
and has been all my life.
>> One of the most miserable
times of my life and his was
when he had to go to school.
If I had just been
allowed, and he had just
been allowed at the
age of five or six
to continue on the visionary
path that every child has,
it would have made
a big difference.
And Joe-- Joe refused
to cave, you know?
I caved over and over again
because I felt that's what I
had to do in order to
survive, and Joe didn't.
And so Joe was always
my example of what
it's like when you
live into your heart,
live into the beauty
that you see in life.
>> Education of children
has been a terrible thing,
but it's given us what
the culture wants,
not what the human really
needs, but what a culture based
on our whole economic system,
our whole economic structure.
If it's good for business--
what is the old saying?
If it's good for General
Motors, it's good for whatever.
And anything that gets in
the way of that slavish--
I mean, just this
real enslavement
by an economic
system, as we have.
If anything gets
in its way, it's
going to be removed,
if possible.
Rudolf Steiner-- I consider
one of the great geniuses
of the last six centuries.
Steiner had it
really figured out.
Waldorf education-- it's called
Waldorf because a tobacco
company asked Steiner,
would he set up
an education system for
the children of the workers
in the tobacco company?
There's something really
hilarious about that whole
back and forth.
And they wanted their
children to have something
better than they had had.
And so Rudolf Steiner
came up with what we now
call Waldorf education.
And anyone who has ever really
gone into Waldorf education
sits back just simply amazed
at the incredible capacity
of the three or
four-year-old child
to move for their own
well-being at all times.
They're always moving
for their well-being.
And Steiner's Waldorf
school was where
that could be nurtured
fully and completely.
And if Waldorf
schools had really
spread over the whole world--
I'm serious-- I think it
changed just about everything.
In about 1920, when--
Steiner, I think, left in '23.
About that time,
the earliest Nazis
had begun to move as
a party in Germany.
And it's rumored-- someone
thinks that possibly they
poisoned Steiner because
he died very mysteriously--
because he was in the way.
And one of the first
things the Nazis did
when they took over Germany was
to seize all of the information
centers--
radio, newspapers, and so on.
This is when the Nazis
took over fully--
the Hitler business.
But above all, they stopped all
Waldorf education in Germany,
and it was red-hot in Germany.
Everybody was trying to get
their child in a Waldorf
school.
And here, all of a sudden,
this newcomer, this Hitler
closes them all down.
And they said, well, why did
you pick on Waldorf schools
and close them down?
And he said because
I want children
trained from the
beginning to obey.
Waldorf teaches them to think.
And so there we have this
marvelously clear insight
into the two forces that are
still operating in the world
today as it was then.
These are those
that want control
and to be the head
of the control,
the master of the
control, and those
who want the true unfolding
of human intelligence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Joe's influence on
childbirth was profound on me.
My mother had
hospital childbirth,
and I hadn't really thought
about any other way of doing it
till I met Joe and met all these
people that Joe knew and heard
Joe talking about
natural childbirth.
And I, thinking about it--
I don't want to
go to a hospital.
I want to have my
baby naturally.
I want to have it
in my own home.
I just wanted to be in
control of my birth.
So his whole
attitude on all that
just opened a whole
new world for me.
It was amazing.
I'm very grateful for
that, very grateful,
indeed, because it
was a beautiful birth.
It was beautiful.
I wouldn't have missed
that for anything.
That birth was a profound
experience for me
and something I've
never quite experienced.
I'd say birth and death
are two of the most
profound experiences you
can have in a lifetime--
physical experiences.
So women are lucky in a way that
they can have that experience
because it's a tying
to the Mother Earth
that you get in no other way.
That's just incredible.
>> I was never pressured into
being what my parents thought I
should be.
They didn't try to project
ideas onto me of something
to live up to.
And so I was
allowed to be myself
and to find what it is
that I wanted to do.
So I think I still have that
inner sense of me and a sense
of self-directedness
and a sense of--
also, a sense of connection with
myself and the world around me,
particularly the natural world.
And that is something
that I can always turn to.
So yeah.
I guess-- I guess one
way I could sum up
that benefit of
being raised that way
is a kind of inner
authority that I feel,
and that I don't need to look
outside of myself to find that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Joe was very
concerned about children.
His book The Magical Child
was absolutely brilliant.
It influenced the way that
Louise and I raised our kids.
And the idea-- you know,
Horace Mann in the 1880s,
the father of modern education,
or arguably 70, 80, 90, 100
years before him, Queen
Theresa in Austria who
started the first
[? Spinnenschulen, ?] where
the children would work
half the day spinning cloth,
and the other half of the day,
they'd get a free education.
And that was the trade-out that
they made with the peasants,
and that was arguably the very
beginning of public education.
And then Horace Mann
industrialized it here
in the United States.
And in both cases, it was
to turn children basically
into machines for
the industrial state.
>> An old friend of mine--
I met her in England years ago.
The famous Jean Liedloff.
She had found this group
of people in the forest,
living in this forest
in South America, who
had never had any interaction
with an outside person at all.
And they lived a
beautiful life in which
the correction of the
behaviors of a child
had never taken place.
And that was the one
thing that they could not
understand about her,
Jean, just going to visit,
was that she couldn't understand
that the infant, from the time
it's born on, functions under
a beautiful relationship
with the world--
that she's lost it entirely,
and the rest of us have lost.
But from the very beginning,
one of the first things that
ever attracted Jean
was she was visiting
with this little village, and
they had a great, deep hole
in the center of it where
they got the best clay
to make their pottery from.
And it was a very deep hole
and had a ladder going down
where they could get to it.
And she saw this tiny little
toddler toddling over next
to this great big hole,
right on the edge of it.
And she screamed out.
No one in that such society
ever raised their voice
for anything.
So the whole village stopped
to see what their visitor was
screaming about.
And she said, well,
that child is going
to fall in that terrible cliff.
And their question
was, but why would
that infant want to
fall in that hole?
And that's simply something
she had never thought about.
The little nursing
babies who were--
they had real sharp knives--
and who would play with
a sharp knife right
when they were at
their mother's breast.
And Jean shouted out again, oh,
that child will hurt his mother
with that knife.
And the question she got
back was, but why would
a child want to
hurt his own mother?
With that kind of an
answer right and left,
she discovered that a child
born into that world--
if nurtured and not
interfered with--
had this remarkable intelligence
for responding exactly the way
they needed to get along in
the world very beautifully,
and that we lose that through
teaching children to behave.
[LAUGHS] and beyond that,
I could go on and on.
But Jean Liedloff is--
along with Robert Wolff--
two people I would
suggest to anyone to read.
Robert Wolff wrote a
book, Original Wisdom.
If anyone would read that
and catch on to what Wolff
is saying, it would change--
and would accept it--
it would just change everything.
He was a Dutchman, sent
by the Dutch government
to the Malaysian people.
And while there, he found
these remarkable people
called the Senoi--
S-E-G-N-O-I-A,
something like that.
When he was with the Senoi,
which took him a long time
to win a place with them and
for them to recognize him--
when he was with this group
of forest people, the forest
itself was quite different when
they were with him and showing
him than without them.
In other words, they
influenced their environment
and lived in their environment
that they were creating.
He experienced true divinity,
true heaven kind of a thing.
And when a friend of
mine, Thom Hartmann
found Wolff still alive
way up in his 90's he
had retired to Hawaii
because the climate was
most in keeping with his needs.
All Wolff could say
when Hartmann asked him
about his experience--
he had written a
diary, by the way,
and Hartmann found the diary,
and he had gone and sought
out where Wolff was, even
now, way up in his 90s,
and was interviewing--
that's how this came about.
And all Wolff could say, we
have no idea what we have lost.
And I think that that's the
thing that just kind of blows
me out of orbit occasionally.
We have no idea of
what we've lost.
Just as we're talking about
there are new sciences and all
the things they can do, and we
can blow up the whole world.
And we can trace the universe
and all this nonsense.
And the people suffer.
>> When Robert Wolff said, we
have no idea what we have lost,
he was--
he was talking about the essence
of what it is to be human,
the original title of his book.
What it is to love each
other, to care for each other,
to be part of nature, to be
interpenetrated by nature,
to realize that we're--
it's a terrible cliche,
but that we're all one--
and not just all
of us, everything--
that it's all one
thing, and that there
is a depth and a
beauty to all of this,
and that one of the most
powerful forces in the world
is love.
And you know, love and
light, and not in some kind
of new age, cliched way.
This was just
fundamental right down--
you know, met these people,
lived with these people,
knew these people,
learned their language,
slept in their villages,
dreamed their dreams,
and changed my life
as a result of it.
That was Robert Wolff's
story, essentially,
and it was such a
meaningful story.
And like I said, it
touched me deeply,
and I know it touched
Joe deeply as well.
>> Joe and I met in the
early summer of 1969.
I had just graduated
from college,
and I was interviewing for
my first job as a teacher--
music teacher-- in
Western Massachusetts.
And Joe was also a music
teacher at the time.
When he wrote Crack
in the Cosmic Egg,
that's when I first knew him--
his first book.
And he was still teaching
school at the time.
He taught maybe two or
three years after that,
and then there came
a point that he just
wanted to follow his
path, or his dharma,
and write about
what he felt inside.
And all the ideas he had,
he wanted to express them.
And so at that point, he
said he was never going
to work for anybody again.
He was going to
do his own thing.
He was probably in his mid 40s
by then, maybe mid to late 40s.
And yes, things
changed at that point.
And he started, especially
when Magical Child came out,
he really started
lecturing a lot.
He had a lecture
person that arranged
lectures all over the country.
And that's what he
did from then on.
He wrote, and he lectured
for the rest of his life.
That was his only focus.
He didn't care about how people
saw him or thought about him.
He just wanted to get his
ideas across to his audience.
>> Joe liked to be
kind of anonymous.
He liked to-- he liked for
people to pay attention
to what it was he was saying.
He didn't like for
people to pay attention
to who he was as a person.
And that was a very
important thing for him--
that he wasn't out there to
present an ego personality
for people to remember.
He was out there to say
things that he really
felt were true and important.
And so I know that
it's those things
that he said that he
wants people to remember.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We dramatically influence
the kind of experience
we're having.
Everyone thinks that all
of this is happening to me,
and that's not the case.
It's what we are doing, and
it's reflected back to us.
We're each responsible
for what kind of forest
we're going through, whether
it's a beautiful place
or whether it's a nightmare.
The majority of us are
in constant conflict
with ourselves over survival.
Survival takes--
that's number one.
And we have other
things we want to do,
but if it's against the
survival impulse in us,
we go for the survival.
There's no doubt of that.
And what I had discovered-- and
it really, really was true--
I discovered that I
couldn't be burned,
at least not by cigarettes.
I mean, it was in my first and
only year, semester in college.
And this was in the college
dormitory, and a bunch of us
and I discovered that
I couldn't be burned.
And I used up a whole
package of Pall Malls,
those great, big, huge, fat,
thick, heavy cigarettes--
whole batch of them, getting
them going full blast
and showing the
boys at the table
that I couldn't be
burned with them.
I was finally putting
them out on my eyelid.
I tried to keep my eye open,
but I couldn't-- reflex was too
strong to protect my eye.
And my lips--
I finally had gotten three
or four I'm going at once
and reversed them and put the
hot end in between my lips
and blew sparks
all over everybody.
I was having a ball.
My roommate was terribly
upset because he said,
you'll be sorry tomorrow.
And I'll never forget
the next morning,
he couldn't wait to look at me
to see how badly burned I was--
no trace at all.
And I told him--
I said, but I knew
there could not be.
And out of that, I
really developed this
to a pretty good extent--
unconflicted behavior.
So long as my system
has no conflict--
one part of me saying do, the
other part say don't, and all
of us know that--
oh, should I buy that, well,
we wrestled back and forth
between whether
we should or not.
Or should we attempt
this venture or not?
We debate these back and forth.
And unconflicted behaviors--
when all conflict is gone--
and at that point, you can do
anything you take a notion.
And that's when I
went up to the cliff
at Palos Verdes in California.
It's the highest cliff on
that coastline, I guess.
And I went up, and it started
just collapsing underneath me
and dumped me right
back down on the ground.
It was a rotten cliff.
There wasn't a stable
rock in the whole place.
And that's when all
of a sudden, this
unconflicted behavior,
which I'd been playing
with for a long time,
I just turned it over
to that unconflicted behavior,
and I went up that cliff.
And the thing collapsed under
me every step of the way I took.
And when I finally
came to the place
where there was the
overhang, that overhang
was at least 20 feet in all.
There was hanging just by
the roots, and I went up,
and I suddenly knew only because
I was reaching for something.
There was nothing there,
and I looked down.
There was nothing below me.
I was on that overhang.
And this tremendous
elation began to fill me,
and I went the whole
distance unable to see
where I was going, just
feeling with my hands
and moving accordingly.
And I moved that whole
distance of about 20 feet
in thin air, touching rocks and
stuff that immediately fell out
from under me.
But I knew inside me, I
could not possibly be hurt.
And people say, well, those are
things you're adding afterward.
No.
They're the reason I got
out of that not only alive,
but elated.
And when I finally
got to the top,
the group I had been
having a picnic with
had moved over to
that very area.
And I popped up over the edge,
and it was an impossible thing.
I couldn't just materialize
out of thin air like that.
But the elation in me, this
huge exhilaration filled me.
And I started pounding
my chest and screaming.
They said I screamed with this--
they thought I
had gone delirious
with the ecstasy which
I felt over that.
And what I felt is that I
had taken death into myself
and had conquered it.
Talk about romantic, adolescent
stuff, but I had taken death,
I had accepted it, and
I had conquered it,
and it would change everything.
From that point on, I would--
nothing could ever
be the same again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Joe has always been
a very spiritual person.
He's always had tremendous
inner experiences.
We were in Siddah Yoga a little
over 10 years, went to India
many times in the winter, spent
a lot of time at the Ashram
in New York in the summers.
That was a big part of
our lives for a long time.
Joe did many, many
talks for them.
He did a lot of--
the call it seva,
where you do work for the yoga.
And he did many
talks, and he was--
people loved him there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One of the first things I
ever found when I went to visit
this meditation master in India
by the name of Muktananda --
he was very famous,
and rightly so
because he is a
very remarkable man.
But one of the things he--
the first thing, I think,
he said to me was--
he had to speak
to an interpreter
because he didn't speak English.
He said, the heart--
and right out of
the clear blue sky,
he didn't know anything
about me except for I
came with my family there--
is that the heart is the
source of everything,
and there is only one heart.
He said the heart
beating in my chest
is the same as the one
beating in your chest
and everyone's chest.
And the heart is God.
The heart is the creator.
The heart is the
source of everything,
and there's only one of those.
And once one understands that
there is only one heart, that
is repeated in every
single human, the same one,
but always purely
individual, how
can we be purely individual
and universal at the same time?
That's the great mystery.
It really is.
But understanding that,
then you never again
have to question what
you feel in your heart.
>> Joe's great--
I think Joe's great
legacy was that you
can compare brilliant
mind with brilliant heart,
that it's all a piece
of the same light.
His work academically was
as good as he could make it.
He brought people in, scholars
that I had never heard of,
many who had simply
been cast aside
because the larger
culture doesn't
know how to assimilate them.
And I read them.
And I heard Joe talk about them.
And I read their books
in manuscript form.
And I realized that they were
coming from the same place
that Joe was, and it was
this kind of we can balance--
we can balance our
thoughtfulness with our caring,
and that we don't have
to sacrifice either one.
We don't rush in and
emotionally throw ourselves
into the middle of nothing,
that we can bring spirit
and word and gesture together.
It just takes a lot of
focus and a lot of heart
and a lot of caring
and a big vision.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> I thought of how simple the
answer is so long as one only
works on oneself.
The minute you try
to sell it, prop--
what is it?
proselyte or whatever,
get at other people--
oh, here, let me tell you, and
form an organization that's
going to change the world--
long gone.
You can never do anything
except one more interference
of everything from our groups.
And so we--
I dare say almost all--
except the Quakers.
I make the exception
with the Quakers
because they've
escaped that danger.
I remember when I first
came across the work of one
of the early Quakers who never
made a move without checking
with his heart, without
checking internally,
should I or should
I not do that?
And he had developed it to a
real source of information,
even to the extent if
he were going along
and saw a division in
the road and wasn't sure
of which way to
go, he would always
stop and wait for his heart
to tell him which way to go.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I dropped out of the yoga
I had followed for 10 years--
and I loved it dearly--
I found that I couldn't
do that any more.
It was-- that had just
closed its door to me.
Now, remember that afternoon
when I took the slogan--
I've forgotten what it was--
that we said to ourselves
to calm our mind down
and immersed myself in it,
wondering what am I to do now?
Because I had followed
this thing for 10 years.
It was a path.
It was a--
I had loads of
company on that path.
I lived it, and all sorts
of unordinary things
happened as a result of it.
What was I to do now?
And I simply waited
with that one thing--
what to do now?
And I got my
answer, and it came.
And I thought about
it for a long time.
I heard it from my heart.
It was as though my heart had
spoken it very clearly to me,
and I did exactly
what it told me to do.
And we had an experience in yoga
of what this is the Blue Pearl.
And if you concentrate
on this Blue Pearl,
it takes you into
levels of consciousness
that are not ordinary.
And if things are going
well, occasionally you'll
see this little blue pearl.
Quite right-- that's
exactly what happened.
If you're in a group of people
who are practicing this from--
I think we were generally
up about a quarter of 3:00
in the morning to be
over at the shrine
where we did our
best meditating,
and you meditate
on this, and you've
been doing this for years, it
begins to pack a lot of energy.
And so this business
of the Blue Pearl
became absolutely
the utmost important.
And I was waiting when all
of a sudden, and this--
I'll skip all the
leading up to it--
when I knew that I had
to leave this yoga,
I had to leave
Siddah Yoga that I
had been happy in for 10 years.
And you know, it was
like leaving your mother
or something.
It was kind of a puzzling thing.
What then?
And this voice came
and came from my heart.
I heard for the first time
in my life, an actual heart--
I mean, an actual voice from my
heart, directly from my heart.
And it was a tremendous
experience from me.
And this will sound
awfully la-di-dah,
but to me, in that
particular state,
it was the voice of Jesus.
And I had never been
a Jesus fanatic,
but it was the voice of Jesus
telling me exactly what to do.
And I turned around, and I
did exactly what it said.
And for about a half
hour, this great shower
of these little blue pearls
seemed to fall all around me.
And I went into this
remarkable state of bliss.
And what all that
leads to is too long.
But it's typical of,
again, these capacities
we have within us that are not
in keeping with our culture.
And if you act outside our
culture, what are you called?
A cult, belonging to a cult.
But when all you're doing
is really following your heart.
>> You know, Jesus's
conversation with his disciples
is just--
and the Sermon on the Mount--
are just the essence
of older cultures.
You know, in Matthew 25,
the disciples come to Jesus,
and they say, how
do we get to heaven?
You know, we're all-- you know,
you're going to go to heaven.
We'd like to go with you.
And we want to
hang out with you.
And he said, oh, it's
very straightforward.
You know, in the end of days,
I'll be sitting here judging,
separating the sheep
from the goats.
And the sheep are going
to heaven with me,
and the goats are going to hell.
And I will say to the sheep,
you know, when I was thirsty,
you gave me water.
When I was hungry,
you gave me food.
When I was in prison,
you came and visited me.
When I was sick, you healed me.
When I was naked,
you clothed me.
When I was in jail--
I think I said
that-- visited me.
Basically, and I went
with through the list.
And then he said, and
I'll say to the goats,
you didn't do those
things, so off you go.
And at that point--
you know, this seems like a
good story up to that point.
At that point,
though, the disciples
freak out because they've
never seen him hungry.
They've never seen him thirsty.
They've never seen
him in prison.
They've never seen him naked.
So you know, homeless,
or clothesless.
And so they say to him,
oh my God, you know,
we've never seen
you-- you know, we've
never been able to do
these things for you.
How are we going to
make it to heaven?
We're screwed.
And he said, as you do
it to the least among us,
you've done it to me.
And that's the essential
message of an ancient culture.
You know, in the
Sermon on the Mount,
he talked about the
least shall be first.
That's the essential message
of the ancient cultures.
And that's the
message that we need
to be integrating
into our culture,
and there's 100,000 churches
probably within 1,000 miles
of us that are preaching
Jesus right now
and don't understand that
core message because it's been
so polluted by our culture.
>> Joe was really important
for me in 1996 when I left this
church and, in many ways,
left ministry for a while.
It was a period in my
life from which I really
had to seek some
kind of guidance
that I couldn't get in a
religious setting anymore.
Everything comes from this
spontaneous experience
of transmission
that was his life.
Every time I would
go to visit him,
he would be usually sitting
on his porch somewhere,
and he just would be looking
at the trees outside his porch.
And he was watching
them just move
and saying to me how wonderful
that was that all of this
was going on, that
all of these trees
were trying to
communicate with him.
And he wasn't saying it in a way
was kind of crazy or offbeat,
but he was saying it in a
way in which we felt together
the connectedness that he had
with nature through his heart.
He just-- that's the way
he saw what was going on.
And that's how he--
that's how he transmitted
himself to everything
that was around him.
>> We can send rockets to
the stars, practically.
We have these
powerful automobiles.
We've got a tremendous medical
system and all the great things
that science gives us.
And the only problem is no
one ever experiences bliss
in that state.
They're all too busy
manipulating the world,
trying to get what
they want from it.
I could go on now all day
on how we have messed up
our true inheritance
of who the human is
on behalf of cultural controls
>> One of the most corrosive
parts of our culture is
the emphasis on competition,
this Darwinian idea that
Spencer--
was it Richard Spencer, I think?
I forget his first name,
but he was Darwin's cousin.
And he was an economist, and
he basically promoted the idea
that there was an economic
version of Darwinism, which
is really how we
understand Darwinism now,
and which is a complete
misunderstanding, frankly,
of much of what Darwin wrote.
But nonetheless, it's completely
infiltrated our culture,
right down to the
level of our schools,
where we're pitting our
children against each other
in this competitive way and
making some feel like failures
and making others feel like,
you know, little Donald Trumps--
you know, little kings,
little emperor kings.
And then that dysfunction then
echoes through their lives
and echoes through our
culture, and it just
continues on and on.
Collaboration and cooperation
are really the way of nature.
You know, in fact, look
at your body, for example.
If one cell in your
body decided hey,
you know, I'm not getting
my fair share of nutrients.
I want the nutrients
of that cell
and that cell and
that cell, and I'm
going to start taking those.
And so it just started
taking the nutrients
from all those cells and started
dividing faster and faster
and faster.
We have a name for
that in biology.
It's called cancer, and that is
what we're teaching our kids.
That's what we're
teaching our society.
That's the basis
of our culture--
cancer.
And you know, we have now
become the cancer of the planet.
It's seven billion
people on planet Earth.
We're using more than 50% of
the net photosynthetic output
of the planet.
We're using more than half of
all the fresh water on Earth.
We're despoiling the atmosphere.
We're destroying
species left and right.
We're destroying ourselves
because of competition
instead of cooperation.
The way that our
bodies actually work
is the liver collaborates with
the spleen and with the heart,
and you know, everything
kind of works together.
And by working together,
by cooperating,
you have a living organism
that's functional.
And societies, the
older societies--
what I refer to as
older cultures--
you know, what Robert Wolff
talked about in his books,
what Joe talked about in Crack,
The Crack in the Cosmic Egg--
they got it.
The cooperation, collaboration,
love, bringing people together
for a common good.
The potlatch
culture, where if you
wanted to have
status in society,
you got that status by giving
away more than anybody else
did.
That the idea that
leadership, that leadership
was actually service.
And so the most
difficult job was
to be the chief, the leader
because that was the person who
actually had the least amount
of power, who was, you know,
the person who was subordinate
to everybody else in terms
of making things work.
Most people can't even
imagine societies like this.
You read Peter Farb's book
Man's Rise to Civilization.
It's about first contact with
34 different Native American
tribes back in the 1600s and
early 1700s in North America.
And over and over
and over and over
again, you see
these older cultures
that were entirely
cooperation-based instead
of competition-based.
And they didn't stratify,
and they did live in peace.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I know full well that there
have been two or three times
when I left what was thought
of as the living world and have
experienced other modalities.
I wouldn't call them
worlds, but other states.
And a lot of those
have happened recently.
And I think they've been
happening because it's
getting closer and closer
to the time I'm going
to have to leave the world.
And I think that I've
been given the grace--
if that doesn't
sound too la-di-dah--
I've been given the
grace of experiencing
more and more in the
last oh, few months,
more and more states
of being that are
available outside the
body and beyond body.
And to me I look out, and I
see the gross suffering that
goes on, particularly
in children
who are mistreated by their
ignorant and so on parents
and so on.
How is that?
It's a source of great
pain on the one hand,
and it's certainly real.
Those hungry children
back in the Depression--
I remember them coming
to the door in droves,
begging for food.
That's all very real.
It's very real what's happening
right now with children all
over the world.
But-- so I'm not playing
games of let's pretend
when I say that
we exist on levels
that leave all that way behind.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Actually, I came to his side
just after he had taken his
last breath, and it was a very--
it was a very profound moment.
I experienced just a real--
it was a very
altering experience.
And I felt like it was
something that certainly
changed my life forever.
My whole experience that
reality is different after that.
And I felt this sense of joy.
>> What Joe was to
me was a friend.
But more importantly,
he was a wise elder.
He was a role model.
He was-- he was the person
that I wanted to be, in a way,
and that I knew I wasn't.
You know, I mean, Joe was
just such an exceptional man.
There's been very
few Joe Pearces who
have come out of our culture.
He wasn't just a good man.
He was a good man who
changed the world he changed
the people around him, and one
of the mystical principles,
core mystical principles, is
that if you save one person,
you save the world.
You know, and Joe didn't
just save one person.
Joe changed a lot
of people's lives.
He changed your life.
He changed my life--
for the better.
And that's the work
that many of us
need to be continually
recalibrating our lives around.
>> Very, very peaceful here.
It has a nice, nice
feel to it here.
He would have loved this
place, being buried here.
He's planted-- he's
right next to the garden.
He always wanted to
be planted and wanted
to be buried on the property.
Sure.
>> What characteristics or
values did we hold close to his
heart?
Or what was important to him?
>> Honesty in a person.
Being true to yourself
and following your heart.
Just following your
path, your dharma was--
no matter what that
was, you needed
to do that because there were
times in his life, you know,
he would--
a moment would come up, and
he would have to decide,
you go this way.
I mean, how do I put this?
It's kind of will you-- you
know, like Christ asking,
will you follow me?
There can be no
doubts, no question.
You follow.
Whatever that takes,
whatever you need to do,
you follow that path
where it takes you.
Wherever that takes you,
you need to do that,
and you need to go there.
And he did that.
He did that in his life.
He remained, you know, in that--
when it came down to it, he
followed where he needed to go,
and he did what he needed
to do to be true to himself.
So he was a great man.
He was a great man.
[MUSIC PLAYING]